Consider this scatter plot showing
the relationship between interest rate and loan amount.
How might we show how borrower rating or monthly payment relate to these variables?
One option we have in this case is to use different encodings on
the points to indicate the value of one of these variables on each point.
The type of encoding that is most useful for
the additional variable will depend on if it is qualitative or quantitative.
Let's take a closer look at three encodings: shape, size, and color.
Shape is a good encoding for categorical variables.
Since there's no natural order of shapes,
this is an especially good choice for nominal type data.
Here, the borrower rating is indicated by one of three shapes on the plot.
You can see that for a given loan amount,
interest rates for borrowers of class A tend to be lower than those of B or
C. Size is an encoding that is often used for numeric variables.
In this plot, you can see how the monthly payment
is derived from the loan amount and interest rate.
A larger point size indicates a larger payment.
When using size, it is important to pay attention to
the mapping between the variable's value to the size of each point.
For example, these points associate radius with value.
However, this has a distorting effect since it is the area of each point that stands out.
A point with doubled value ends up with
four times the area, a disproportionate representation.
It is more common for area to be associated directly with value.
Sometimes, different functions might need to be used so that all points remain readable,
similar to how you might perform an access transformation.
The most common third variable encoding you will see is color.
Color can be used for both qualitative and quantitative variables.
This is a large topic that deserves
its own focus and will be covered in the next segment of the lesson.